scientists now know that the asteroid
smashed into the Sea of Mexico's Yucatan
Peninsula we're in a unique twist of
fate a deadly chain reaction was waiting
to be unleashed something I'm hoping to
showcase with two explosive experiments
so this tank represents the deep ocean
obviously scaled down many many times up
here is going to be our projectile
firing down our asteroid into the deep
sea and this should show us what would
have happened when a giant asteroid
impacted on the largest environment on
the planet once detonated our mini
asteroid will fire so fast that we've
set up two slow-motion cameras to
capture the action as it impacts our sea
this is the ocean asteroid experiment
volume 1 everybody ready every single
air space in my body just reverberating
with the boom that's unbelievable
in real time it was just a big bang but
slow down
you see the pressure way coming out
through the air I have never seen that
before you can see water just expanding
bowing outwards and it is a phenomenal
amount of energy but the water has
absorbed the power from the asteroid and
that's exactly what would have happened
if it had hit the deep sea so you've got
a lot of water vapor going up into the
air there would have been a tsunami of
it would have wiped out everything at
the coast but crucially things that were
living in land and things that were a
long way away from the impact would have
survived if this had happened in the
middle of the deep sea it wouldn't have
wrought about the end of the dinosaurs
it turns out for the asteroid smash not
into the deep ocean but the shallow sea
where the seabed itself held a lethal
secret a crucial part to this dinosaur
tragedy so in this last experiment we're
going to try and show the same situation
has actually happened in the Yucatan
Peninsula so there the sea was tens
possibly hundreds of meters deep rather
than thousands and this tank should
represent that so what we've got it's
just a few centimeters of water or sea
and then this which is the seabed and
then the Earth's crust with our second
mini asteroid locked and loaded it's
almost time to find out what happened
that day 66 million years ago so now
this is the calm before the storm just
imagine that this is the Late Cretaceous
in the jungles the swamps the deserts
life is continuing as it has done for
tens of millions of years
and then in the sky a tiny faint spot
almost like a star appears and then
within seconds everything changes and
the world will never be the same again
okay final test asteroid into shallow
sea three two one
[Music]
let's examine the destruction it's come
in hit the seabed because there's not
enough to see here to dissipate all of
that energy and force and it's gone
straight down into the bedrock this
collision with the seabed is what made
the event fatal for the dinosaurs but to
understand why I need to watch it in
slow mode so the water is vaporized but
there's also enormous amounts of what's
called blast debris or ejecta clouds of
dust that are being thrown up into the
atmosphere and the dust was the final
name in this deadly event because it was
made up of trillions of tons of
suffocating sulfur once in the
atmosphere this unique dust was so thick
it botted out the Sun in just two weeks
a cloak of darkness and freezing
temperatures were brought across the
earth a desolate winter that lasted for
years
that's when it becomes catastrophic when
simply nothing could survive the plants
starved of sunlight would have died the
largest animals ran out of food
remarkably quickly the creatures that
scavenged eventually they had nothing to
feed on either 70% of species on the
planet simply went extinct